connected assisted installer (#376)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/installer/connected-assisted-installer.md

development-time skew, for the most part, and the service that builds
the live ISOs with the assisted installer components should be able to
adjust the version of the assisted installer to match the version of
OpenShift, if necessary.

## Implementation History

### Proof of Concept (June, 2020)

* https://github.com/filanov/bm-inventory : The REST service
* https://github.com/ori-amizur/introspector : Gathers hardware and
  connectivity info on a host
* https://github.com/oshercc/coreos_installation_iso : Creates the
  RHCOS ISO - runs as a k8s job by bm-inventory
* https://github.com/oshercc/ignition-manifests-and-kubeconfig-generate :
  Script that generates ignition manifests and kubeconfig - runs as a
  k8s job by bm-inventory
* https://github.com/tsorya/test-infra : Called by
  openshift-metal3/dev-scripts to end up with a cluster of VMs like in
  dev-scripts, but using the assisted installer
* https://github.com/eranco74/assisted-installer.git : The actual
  installer code that runs on the hosts

## Drawbacks

The idea is to find the best form of an argument why this enhancement should _not_ be implemented.

## Alternatives

> The telco/edge bare metal team is working on support for automating

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The bare metal IPI team is working on support for automating
```

Reviewer 2: We cannot say "IPI" in external docs.  We need to say "installer-provisioned infrastructure".  But do we really have a metal team that ignores user-provisioned infrastructure?

Author: Fixed in #382 

The team working on the automation does not support user-provisioned deployments today. IIUC, the main installer team supports those.

  - "@beekhof"
  - "@deads2k"
  - "@hexfusion"
  - "@mhrivnak"
approvers:
  - "@crawford"
  - "@abhinavdahiya"
  - "@eparis"
creation-date: 2020-06-09
last-updated: 2020-06-10
status: implementable
see-also:
  - "/enhancements/baremetal/minimise-baremetal-footprint.md"
---

# Assisted Installer for Connected Environments

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [ ] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

## Summary

This enhancement describes changes in and around the installer to
assist with deployment on user-provisioned infrastructure. The use
cases are primarily relevant for bare metal, but in the future may be
applicable to cloud users who are running an installer UI directly
instead of using a front-end such as `cloud.redhat.com` or the UI
provided by their cloud vendor.

## Motivation

The target user is someone wanting to deploy OpenShift, especially on
bare metal, with as little up-front infrastructure dependencies as

> possible. This person has access to servers and wants to run workloads

Reviewer 2: "to servers" is not very specific.  You mean "to cloud.redhat.com", right?

Author: No, here we mean that they have physical server hardware of their own on which they want to run OCP to manage workloads.

Reviewer 3: I think this means "has access to server-grade hardware on which they want to install OpenShift and then run workloads quickly".

Author: I added the word "hardware" to the sentence to clarify.

quickly. They do not necessarily have the administrative privileges to
create private VLANs, configure DHCP/PXE servers, or manage other
aspects of the infrastructure surrounding the hardware where the
cluster will run. If they do have the required privileges, they may
not want to delegate them to the OpenShift installer for an IPI
installation, preferring instead to use their existing tools and
processes for some or all of that configuration. They are willing to
accept that the cluster they build may not have all of the same

> features as an IPI cluster on day 1, but that by taking additional

Reviewer 2: nit: "an IPI cluster" -> "a cluster with installer-provisioned infrastructure"

Author: fixed

steps later they will be able to add more automatic infrastructure

> management and make it fully production-ready.

Reviewer 2: User-provisioned infrastructure doesn't mean a cluster isn't production-ready.  Maybe just stop with "automatic infrastructure management."?

Author: This has more to do with waiting to take some setup steps until day 2, or not doing them at all, than it does with UPI.

Reviewer 2: Then probably drop both "installer-provisioned infrastructure" and "fully production-ready" and just focused on "day 2 changes to automate infrastructure management"?

### Goals

- Make initial deployment of usable and supportable clusters simpler.
- Move more infrastructure configuration from day 1 to day 2.
- Support connected on-premise deployments.

> - Support existing IPI features, especially for day 2 cluster

Reviewer 2: nit: provisioner shouldn't matter for features, especially day-2 features.  This should be:

> * Support cluster-managed infrastructure features, especially on day 2.

Or something like that...

Author: I'm not aware that it is currently possible to install a UPI bare metal cluster and then on day 2 use IPI to add workers. That's the goal here.

Reviewer 3: There are features that you get today on bare metal only if you used IPI and do not get with UPI, particularly power management via BMC. Given the direction we're going, it probably makes sense for us to stop referring to that as "existing IPI features" and get in the habit of using a more direct descriptor.

Author: Are we really just disagreeing about the wording? Or is the description unclear?

Reviewer 2: I had to look up [baseboard management controller][1], so take this with a grain of "Trevor has no idea what he's talking about" salt ;).  But it seems to me that "I have an existing metal cluster and want to give its machine API controller the ability and authority to manage Machines as a day 2 operator" would be a different enhancement from (and possibly a prerequisite for) this install-time enhancement.  Couldn't you set up that day-2 management without needing to call out to `cloud.redhat.com`?  You'd already have a local cluster where you could host whatever the incoming machines would need for their first boot...

[1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intelligent_Platform_Management_Interface#Baseboard_management_controller

Author: You're right, the two things are somewhat related.

The existing bare metal IPI workflow requires management controller credentials for each host, so the installer can automate the deployment. Under that flow the installer has all of the information that would be required to turn the machine API on, so it does not make much sense to assume the machine API is disabled and we expect to always leave it enabled.

It also should be possible to use the UPI process to install a cluster and then add the machine API integration later. There's a separate set of work planned for that, regardless of the progress on this enhancement. For a UPI process, the user is going to have to do more work to set up the machine API, including BareMetalHost CRs with specific settings and connecting them to Machine CRs.

The important thing we're referring to here is that we can save some of the information available during the new automated installation process so that the user has less work to do to enable the machine API later. It seemed like adding the details of how that would work would be going too deep into planned implementation, but if we need more detail in this document about how that would work we can add it.

Reviewer 4: The current interface which decides if cluster-managed-baremetal pieces are enabled is the platform, so when you do an IPI deployment using `platform: baremetal` you get those features.

However the current UPI docs use `platform: none` and there's no currently supported way to enable the managed-baremetal pieces after initial deployment.  There has been some work looking at how we might change that ref https://github.com/openshift/machine-api-operator/pull/560

However I don't think making day-2 enablement of managed baremetal is a prerequisite for this assisted-installer workflow, because AFAIK the plan is to use the `platform: baremetal` even in the case where you choose the "boot it yourself" path - this also gives some other features like cluster-hosted loadbalancing and DNS, so it makes sense to reuse the same platform if possible.  /cc @avishat to keep me honest on plans here :)

Reviewer 5: Indeed, we use installer platform: baremetal to generate the ignitions

  management and scale-out.

### Non-Goals

- Because the initial focus is on bare metal, this enhancement does
  not exhaustively cover variations needed to offer similar features
  on other platforms (such as changes to image formats, the way a host
  boots, etc.). It is desirable to support those platforms, but that
  work will be described separately.
- Environments where hosts cannot reach the internet unimpeded

>   ("disconnected" or "air-gapped") will require more work to support

Reviewer 2: nit: Canonical wording for this is "[restricted network][1]", so you should include that in your list of synonyms.

[1]: https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/blob/50e2b45e6c90f6956b916e11133fb83cb08e4e6e/modules/installation-about-restricted-network.adoc

Author: done

- Replace the existing OpenShift installer.
- Describe how these workflows would work for multi-cluster
  deployments managed with Hive or ACM.

## Proposal

There are several separate changes to enable the assisted installer
workflows, including a GUI front-end for the installer, a cloud-based
orchestration service, and changes to the installer and bootstrapping
process.

The process starts when the user goes to an "assisted installer"
application running on `cloud.redhat.com`, enters details needed by
the installer (OpenShift version, ssh keys, proxy settings, etc.), and
then downloads a live RHCOS ISO image with the software and settings
they need to complete the installation locally.

The user then boots the live ISO on each host they want to be part of
the cluster (control plane and workers). They can do this by hand
using thumb drives, by attaching the ISO using virtual media support
in the BMC of the host, or any other way they choose.

When the ISO boots, it starts an agent that communicates with the REST
API for the assisted installer service running on `cloud.redhat.com`
to receive instructions. The agent registers the host with the

> service, using the user's pull secret embedded in the ISO's ignition

Reviewer 2: nit: "ignition" -> "Ignition config" to match our [canonical wording][1].

[1]: https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/blame/88033b5b246b6510ce89e5165f1fb9885f9a7a47/modules/rhcos-about.adoc#L24

Author: done

- Replace the existing OpenShift installer.
- Describe how these workflows would work for multi-cluster
  deployments managed with Hive or ACM.

## Proposal

There are several separate changes to enable the assisted installer
workflows, including a GUI front-end for the installer, a cloud-based
orchestration service, and changes to the installer and bootstrapping
process.

The process starts when the user goes to an "assisted installer"
application running on `cloud.redhat.com`, enters details needed by
the installer (OpenShift version, ssh keys, proxy settings, etc.), and
then downloads a live RHCOS ISO image with the software and settings
they need to complete the installation locally.

The user then boots the live ISO on each host they want to be part of
the cluster (control plane and workers). They can do this by hand
using thumb drives, by attaching the ISO using virtual media support
in the BMC of the host, or any other way they choose.

When the ISO boots, it starts an agent that communicates with the REST
API for the assisted installer service running on `cloud.redhat.com`
to receive instructions. The agent registers the host with the

> service, using the user's pull secret embedded in the ISO's ignition config

Reviewer 2: nit: "ignition" -> "Ignition", per [this thread][1].

[1]: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/376#discussion_r440459336

> service, using the user's pull secret embedded in the ISO's ignition config

Reviewer 6: @romfreiman do we plan to embed the user pull secret to the ISO?
Currently this isn't the case and I think we can use some other token (that the cloud service generate) for the authentication rather than the user pull secret. 
In general I think it's preferable not to have user secrets / passwords in the ISO.

Reviewer 2: If we have concerns about holding user secrets server-side, this could be the service encrypting the pull secret to itself, storing the encrypted blob in the ISO, and just hanging on to the encryption key.

   role, boot device, etc.). The agent executes different installation
   logic depending on its role (bootstrap-master, master, or worker).

The agent posts the results for the command back to the
service. During the actual installation, the agents post progress.

As agents report to the assisted installer, their hosts appear in the
UI and the user is given an opportunity to examine the hardware
details reported and to set the role and cluster of each host.

The assisted installer orchestrates a set of validations on all
hosts. It ensures there is full L2 and L3 connectivity between all of
the hosts, that the hosts all meet minimum hardware requirements, and
that the API and ingress VIPs are on the same machine network.

The discovered hardware and networking details are combined with the
results of the validation to derive defaults for the machine network
CIDR, the API VIP, and other network configuration settings for the
hosts.

When enough hosts are configured, the assisted installer application
replies to the agent on each host with the instructions it needs to
take part in forming the cluster. The assisted installer application

> selects one host to run the bootstrap services used during

Reviewer 6: In regard to the bootstrap service.
I think it's worth mentioning that unlike all other OpenShift installers, the assisted installer doesn’t use an auxiliary bootstrap node.
Instead, it will pivot the bootstrap to become a master node once the control plane is running on 2 other master nodes.
This flow reduces the minimum number of nodes to 3.

Reviewer 2: > Instead, it will pivot the bootstrap to become a master node once the control plane is running on 2 other master nodes.

Do we run a descheduler by default now?  In addition to the "did we clean out all the bootstrap-specific stuff?" concerns we had about pivoting bootstrap into a compute node, pivoting into a control-plane node adds "do we end up with most of the critical pieces all lumped together on the two born-as-control-plane machines?".  Although I guess a few rounds of control-plane reboots during subsequent updates and config rollouts would wash away any initial lopsided balancing.

Reviewer 7: >  In addition to the "did we clean out all the bootstrap-specific stuff?" concerns we had about pivoting bootstrap into a compute node, 

This is a pretty easy problem to solve, we can add support to Ignition to make everything ephemeral at the OS level (i.e. mount `/var` as a `tmpfs`, `/etc` as an overlayfs and everything else read-only).  Then rebooting guarantees everything done at the filesystem level is gone (and there's no reason for an OpenShift install process to operate at the block level).

Author: This part of the discussion should probably move to #361.

installation, and the other hosts are told to write an RHCOS image to
disk and set up ignition to fetch configuration from the
machine-config-operator in the usual way.

During installation, progress and error information is reported to the
assisted installer application on `cloud.redhat.com` so it can be
shown in the UI.

### Integration with Existing Bare Metal IPI Tools

Clusters built using the assisted installer workflow use the same

> "baremetal" platform setting as clusters built with the IPI

Reviewer 2: More IPI references here and in the subsection header.  Maybe:

> ### Integration with Existing IBare Metal Tools for Installer-Provisioned Infrastructure
>
> Clusters built using the assisted installer workflow use the same "baremetal" platform setting as clusters with installer-provisioned infrastructure.  The cluster runs...

installer. The cluster runs metal3, without PXE booting support.

BareMetalHosts created by the assisted installer workflow do not have
BMC credentials set. This means that power-based fencing is not
available for the associated nodes until the user provides the BMC
details.

### User Stories

#### Story 1

As a cluster deployer, I want to install OpenShift on a small set of
hosts without having to make configuration changes to my network or
obtain administrator access to infrastructure so I can experiment
before committing to a full production-quality setup.

#### Story 2

As a cluster deployer, I want to install OpenShift on a large number
of hosts using my existing provisioning tools to automate launching
the installer so I can adapt my existing admin processes and
infrastructure tools instead of replacing them.

#### Story 3

As a cluster deployer, I want to install a production-ready OpenShift
cluster without committing to delegating all infrastructure control to
the installer or to the cluster, so I can adapt my existing admin

> processes and infrastructure management tools instead of replacing

Reviewer 2: This story seems orthogonal to the enhancement.  Folks can already do this with user-provisioned infrastructure, and afterwards delegate as much or as little of the infrastructure management as they want to the cluster, right?  If there are missing delegation bits, sorting those out seems like it would be a day-2 issue, and this enhancement is about day-1 issues.  Or am I missing a connection...?

Author: We don't currently make it easy for them to add the bare metal machine API on day 2 (see discussion above). Being able to do that is a key requirement for this work. Perhaps that deserves its own enhancement?

them.

#### Story 4

As a cluster hardware administrator, I want to enable power control
for the hosts that make up my running cluster so I can use features
like fencing and failure remediation.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

Much of the work described by this enhancement already exists as a
proof-of-concept implementation. Some aspects will need to change as
part of moving from PoC to product. At the very least, the code will
need to be moved into more a suitable GitHub org.

The agent discussed in this design is different from the
`ironic-python-agent` used by Ironic in the current IPI
implementation.

### Risks and Mitigations

The current implementation relies on

> [minimise-baremetal-footprint](../baremetal/minimise-baremetal-footprint.md). If

Reviewer 2: A reference to the in-flight #361?  What if this enhancement lands but that one does not?  Maybe link the PR instead?

that approach cannot be supported, users can proceed by providing an
extra host (4 hosts to build a 3 node cluster, 6 hosts to build a 5
node cluster, etc.).

## Design Details

### Open Questions

> N/A

Reviewer 2: nit: you can probably drop the whole _Open Questions_ subsection if you have no open questions.
